Hello everyone. Today I want to
introduce some important notions in
combinatorics from a maxel point of
view. So in this framework of box
arithmetic.
So we'll start by looking at some
general properties of a maxel. I'll
quickly review what a maxel is and then
I'm going to go over concepts having to
do with graph theory and also with
partially ordered sets and some variants
and also equivalence classes and things
called tournaments. So I want to
introduce all of these in a sort of a
uniform fashion. Okay. And the
definitions are a little bit different
from what you usually find in a
combinatorics course. We are emphasizing
the maxel structure which lies at the
heart of things as far as I'm concerned.
And the transitive product which is what
we're going to call the multiplication
of maxels is going to play a key role.
So let me first start off by reminding
you that a maxel is a box of pixels and
a pixel is just a two list. So it's a
list containing two boxes a and b in a
prescribed order. So we could say the
pixel a b a comma b and a maxel is just
a bunch of these things put into a box.
All right. So very general the actual
elements or entries of the pixels can be
completely arbitrary boxes. Okay. So
we'll start by defining some basic
properties of maxels um that we're going
to use to build up these various
combinatorial motions. The simplest one
or the first one is the set property
that a maxel has property s meaning it's
a set if it's a set and that means that
every pixel that occurs has multiplicity
one.
I'm going to uh just write this one this
next one like this. Um I think it's just
easier. So the symmetric property we'll
denote that by y is that the maxel is
equal to itself when we take the
transpose. So taking the transpose of a
pixel takes the pixel a b to the pixel
ba and when we take the transpose of a
maxel we take the transpose of all of
the pixels. And if it's invariant under
that operation we say that the maxel is
symmetric.
It's anti-ymmetric denoted with an n. If
the pixel a b being in m and the pixel
ba also being in m implies a equals b.
So the only way that this can happen is
if you have what's called a diagonal uh
pixel
transitive property very important of
course that if the pixel AB is an M and
the pixel BC is an M that implies that
the pixel AC which is the transitive
product that's we're going to call this
product I think from now on the
transitive product of these two pixels
is also an M
that's going to be a very important
product Diagonal is just a property of a
pixel that it's of the form a comma a.
And so we could also say that a maxel is
diagonal if all of its pixels are
diagonal. A maxel is reflexive denoted
by an r. Um precisely when uh for any a
in j what is j? J is the the set of m.
So um if you have a maxel it's got a
bunch of pixels you can create a set of
m. What is that? This is the set of all
boxes which appear somewhere in these
pixels. Okay,
but we take the set. So just
multiplicity one. Okay, we call that J.
Okay, so this reflexive property is that
if A is a box in J. So in other words,
it's appearing as an entry of one at
least one of the pixels in M. Then also
the diagonal pixel a comma a has to be
an element of m and irreflexive
that's the property that that never
occurs. So for any a in j
the diagonal pixel a comma a does not
appear in m.
And finally uh total property denoted
with an O that if we have two distinct
boxes A and B which are in J so they
appear somewhere in the pixels
then either the pixel A comma B is an M
or the pixel B comma A is an M or
possibly both. It's an inclusive or.
Okay so these are fundamental properties
that we're going to use to define a lot
of interesting combinatorial objects.
And the first thing you might want to
check is that there's some natural
implications. If you have some of the
properties, then others follow as well.
So I'm just going to leave you to check
these various properties. For example, t
+ y equals r. If you have a max which is
both transitive and symmetric, then it's
reflexive. Okay. All right. So now let's
move on to some basic combinatorial
notions via maxels.
The uh the first one is
sort of remarkably simple. It's just
that of a directed multigraph.
So what is a directed multigraph in this
framework? It is just a maxel. So with
no conditions attached, just an
arbitrary maxel we're going to call that
a directed multigraph.
So I'm going to illustrate these various
concepts with a special situation where
the underlying set J is just the set 1 2
3 4 and we're going to use the natural
ordering of that. These are just natural
numbers to then represent a maxel in
terms of its matrix form to we can
visualize it as a matrix.
uh we can also visualize things by
trying to draw some some some pictures
of of graphs or or hassid diagrams of of
partially or sets etc. But I'm going to
just stick with this uh sort of
combinatorial and matrix views of
things. Okay, so an example of a
directed multigraph that's just a maxyl.
So here's a maxel. Okay, it has pixels 1
2 1 2 2 3 3 1 44 2 4 42. And we can
interpret this in terms of uh a graph in
the following way. You think of the four
uh natural numbers 1 2 3 4 as being
vertices say on the page. Okay, little
dots. And then each one of these pixels
represents uh an edge between one vertex
and another. But it's a directed edge
because these are oriented. So one two
represents an a directed edge from
vertex one to vertex two. And here's
another one. So that means we have two
directed edges from vertex one to vertex
two. So one there and then maybe another
one there. In addition we have a
directed edge from two to three, from
three to one, from four to four. So that
means u an edge going from a vertex to
itself. That's usually called a loop in
graph theory. Okay. So altogether this
thing here has a a double edge from one
to two and uh a loop at four and edges
from two to three, three to one, two to
four and four to two and the matrix form
is this. Now I just have to remind you
that um when we are writing these number
maxels uh the index set is um important.
Usually we start indexing with zero but
sometimes we like to index with one. So
traditional linear algebra is usually
with indexing starting with one. So
distinguish those two notions. I'm going
to adopt the following convention that
if we're starting the indexing with
zero, I'm going to make this top left
corner bold. Okay. I'm going to make
that bold like this. Okay. So if you see
something like this, ah that's bold,
that top left corner. You know that the
indexing implied here is starting with
zero. So this is the 0 0 element 01 02.
This is one zero two zero etc. Okay. If
it's not bold like like here then the
assumption is this is starting indexing
with one. So 1 2 3 four col rows going
down and 1 2 3 4 columns going across.
All right. So what we've done here is
we've put a two here in the one two
place that corresponds to these two
pixels one two. So this entry here is
recording the multiplicity of this pixel
in this maxle. The 23 that's represented
by uh this one here. The 31 by this one
here. The 44 uh over here. The 24 this
one here. And the 42 here. Okay. So
these are all multiplicities of the
corresponding
pixels in this maxel.
So that's just a directed multigraph
which is just a general maxel.
All right. So here's a
a variant of that a directed graph. So
this is a maxel which has one property
that it's a set. So that means that all
the pixels which occur in it can only
occur with multiplicity one. No bigger
multiplicity is allowed.
And this kind of maxel is also called in
other contexts a relation. So in this
world a directed graph and a relation
are exactly the same things.
They're just different terms for a maxel
which has the set property. So here's an
example 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 1 3. As a graph we
can think of this as a directed force
cycle. So we have an edge from 1 to two,
from 2 to three, from three to four, and
from four to one. And then we have an
extra edge from I guess 1 to three.
Okay? And here is the
matrix form for that. So there's a one
there for the 1, two. There's one for
the 2, three. A 3 4 is that one there.
The 4 1 is that one there. And the 1 13
is that one there. Now if we wanted to
interpret this as a relation we could
say well this represents the following
relation that object one is related to
object two relation is a sort of a
one-way thing rel object two is related
to three object three is related to
object four object four is related to
object one and object one is related to
object three
great okay a multigraph a multigraph is
a maxel which is symmetric
Okay, symmetric. So if it contains one
two, it's also going to contain 2 1. If
it contains 2, three, it's going to
contain 32. And in fact, if we take the
transposes of all of these pixels, then
we get exactly the same maxel back
again. Okay? Altogether, what we have
here with this one is we have a double
edge between one and two. So in the
graph world, the way you interpret um a
pair of directed edges from one to two
and also from two to one is you say,
well that's like a like a highway that
has one lane going this way and one lane
going that way. So we don't have to say
that it's got two lanes. It's implied.
So we represent this with an undirected
edge. So an underdirected edge from one
to two on a physical piece of paper is
uh kind of representing this pair of
directed edges given by these two
pixels. Okay. So altogether this thing
has a double edge between one and two
because there's two of them and a double
edge also between three and four because
there's these two pairs and a single
edge between two and three. And the
matrix form is this one here. Uh so that
two represents this the two one twos.
This two represents the two two ones and
so on. Uh the two threes and the the
four threes and three fours represented
that way. Okay, that's a multigraph. So
it's got edges which are undirected but
there can be you know more than um than
one of them.
Also, also by the way there could be um
loops. So we could also have um a four
comma four that would be legitimate also
in a multigraph. So multigraph has
multiple edges which are undirected and
a loop.
Loops are possible. Okay. And now we
come to the probably the most familiar
kind of graph which is a simple graph.
What is a simple graph in this world?
It's a maxel which has these three
properties. First of all, it's a set.
It's irreflexive
and it's symmetric. Okay, so there's an
example. It's a it's a set. There's no
repetition. It's irreflexive. What does
that mean? It means that the diagonal
pixels do not occur. There is no pixel
of the form 2, 2 or 3, 3. Okay, none of
those. So, it's irreflexible. Zeros
along the diagonal of the matrix form.
And it's symmetric in the obvious sense
that if we have two four then we also
have four too. So the matrix form of it
is also symmetric. Now in terms of what
this looks like this particular one well
we have an edge between one and two. We
have an edge between um one and three.
Between two and four and between three
and four. So this is like a four cycle.
Um between one and two there's an edge.
Between two and four there's an edge.
Between four and three there's an edge.
And between three and one there's an
edge. And in graph theory, we would also
say this is a bipartite graph because if
you take the vertices one and four and
say two and three, then you have all the
all possible edges between this set of
vertices and this set of vertices. So
this one and this one and this one and
this one.
Okay. So those are uh important examples
of graphs. So all of graph theory then
is uh expressible in this language and
it's a very concise and useful language
to to talk about uh graphs. The actual
visual representations are are rather
arbitrary because how you put these
vertices on the page etc is is rather
arbitrary. Uh these are the the
essential forms for such a thing. So
this it's it's really this object here
which is the essential thing and you can
think about this matrix representation
as sort of a convenient way of
representing it. It's of course not
unique right because we adopt the
convention that we are allowed to add
additional rows of zeros or additional
columns of zeros. So this matrix form is
not really unique but the the box itself
the maxel is completely unique and
determined.
Okay. So now I'm going to go over uh
some cominatorial concepts having to do
with order where we order things. We'll
start with a pre-order which is a maxel
which is a set which is also reflexive
and now transitive. Okay, here the
transitive property comes into play. So
here's a set.
Everything occurs with just multiplicity
one. And it's reflexive. The diagonal
entries are all ones. So we have a 1 one
or 22 or 3 4. That's reflexive. And it's
transitive. The transitive property is
maybe not so obvious. I mean, you have
to sort of check a lot of things. So uh
here's pixel 1 2. Here's pixel 2 three.
That means that the pixel 13 also ought
to be included and it is. So there's a
lot of checking to do but with the
matrix or maxel point of view it's quite
simple. You just take this this maxle
and you take the transitive product with
itself. So you take m transm we could
say and it turns out you get this thing
here and you see then that all the
pixels which occur in this product. So
all possible sort of transitive products
of the pixels in here are among those
that you already have. So you're not
getting any new pixels. You're not going
outside of the maxel when you take the
transitive product of pixels. That's the
transitive property. Okay. So actually
we see why the maxel point of view is so
useful because we have this transitive
product from maxels and that's exactly
the sort of the key property that a
pre-order has.
So now let's go to sort of the main
the main notion um which is that of a
post set. Okay, usually called partially
ordered set but uh let's just call it a
post set. Our emphasis here is a little
bit different. It's not the underlying
set which you might think is the set one
two three four that's really critical.
The the the really important thing is
the actual maxel itself. So what is it?
It's a maxel which is a set and it's
reflexive
and it's anti-ymmetric
and it's transitive. Okay. So uh let me
just compare that with the previous one
the pre-order. Okay. What we're doing is
we're adding one more condition. It's
now anti-ymmetric.
What does that mean? Like this is not
anti-ymmetric. Why? Because there's this
pixel um 1 comma 2 and there's pixel 2,
one, right? That's not allowed if you're
um having an anti-ymmetric condition.
Okay. So to go back to our post set
here, here's an example. This is uh
basically the just the previous one
except that we've removed this u two one
entry. So now it's anti-ymmetric. So for
every off diagonal entry the transpose
um the transpose has multiplicity zero.
Okay. So this particular partially
ordered set can be visualized um because
we're sort of ordering things. We've got
these four things and what we're doing
is we're putting the one at the bottom
say and the four is at the top and the
two and the three are sort of in the
middle. So one is less than everything u
and four is above everything and two and
three themselves are not comparable but
they're bigger than one and less than
four. Okay. And so here is just a record
of the various pixels that occur.
and the transitive property. Well, we
could just check that. Okay, let's just
check that. We take this thing here and
I just square it as a as a matrix. And
we see that the what we're getting is um
supported exactly on this on the
original maxel that we have. In other
words, all the entries of this maxel are
in in positions where we already have
entries in the original maxel. That's
verifying the transitive property for
this thing. So this is a post set. In
fact, it's sometimes called a diamond
post set. Okay, a strict post set is a
maxle which is a set. Okay, and it's
transitive and instead of being
reflexive, now it's irreflexive.
So instead of having ones on the
diagonal, it has zeros on the diagonal.
You might ask, what happened to this
anti-ymmetric condition? Well, it turns
out that's still around, but we don't
have to say it explicitly because it's
one of the implications of having
irreflexivity and transitivity. So,
these two properties imply the
anti-ymmetric property. Okay. So, this
is a a situation where we don't have a
like less than or equal. We think in
terms of less than or greater than that
kind of relation. Okay.
Okay. Um and I might leave uh these ones
here. A total pre-order is a max which
is a set and it's reflexive and
transitive and it has this total
property. That means that for any sort
of um pair of
transposed
positions there's at least one of those
entries which is strictly positive.
Okay. So um this is an example here. One
and two are sort of equivalent to form
the bottom. Then three is in the middle
and four is on the top. And it's not
anti-ymmetric because 1 2 and 2 one are
elements.
And then a total order is a max which is
a set and it's reflexive and it's
transitive and it's anti-ymmetric and
total. Okay. So it doesn't have this
this pair one two and two one that's not
allowed. So this is um this thing here
is the um the maxel that's representing
this sort of standard order on the the
vertices 1 2 3 4. So we have a strong
order one is less than equal to two
which is less than three less than equal
to four. It's a total order represented
by this matrix here. And the
transitivity again can be just checked
by making a nice little computation.
There's the square of this maxel or
matrix and you see that again the
support here all the nonzero entries are
just in the same positions as over here
and then a strict total order is what
you get when you replace this reflexive
uh condition with irreflexive. So you're
no longer allowing um these these um
diagonal uh pixels. So uh we just remove
them. Okay, otherwise it's the same
example. And this then corresponds to
the order where we have one less than
two, less than three, less than four.
Okay,
this is a good viable sort of
alternative to to the previous one. And
again, we can check um
the uh the transitivity again by making
a maximal
transitive product computation.
Okay, so just two more. Um, an
equivalence relation or just an
equivalence is a maxle which is a set
and it's reflexive and symmetric and
transitive.
Okay, there's a set reflexive. It has
the diagonal
pixels 1 22 3 4. In other words, ones
along the diagonal. It's symmetric
obviously sort of symmetric. 2 three is
included. So 32 is included as well. and
it's transitive. Uh we can check that by
taking this thing here and squaring it
and we see that the supports are the
same. So yes, it is transitive and uh
this represents what's sometimes called
a partition. So what we have really here
is that 2, three and four are equivalent
in this uh in the context while one is
sort of separate. So we have a partition
of our four uh set one two three four
into the set one and then the a
complimentary set 2 three four
and finally a tournament. A tournament
is a maxle which is a set and it's
irreflexive
and [clears throat] anti-ymmetric and
total
there's a set it's irreflexive zeros
along the diagonal anti-ymmetric
uh so no pixel and its transpose have
multiplicity positive strictly positive
and it's total what does that mean it
means that so for any one of these sort
of transposed pairs at least one of them
has has a a positive strictly positive
entry. Okay. So you amongst this pair
there's there's a one and between
I guess one and three there's a pair and
between one and four there's there's an
object and between uh two and four
there's an object and between three and
four there's an object. Okay. Every pair
of distinct vertices has exactly one
edge between them and there are no loops
um and no pair has edges in both
directions.
Okay, great. So we've seen quite a lot
of nice examples of very fundamental
combinatorial things and um we've
created those things by just looking at
particular combinations of fundamental
properties that a maxel very generally
can have. And of course there's
combinations here that we haven't looked
at that are possibly interesting and and
no doubt some of them will have been
studied. Okay. But maybe not certainly
not as much as the ones that we've
talked about today. And there might very
well be some combinations here that uh
that have not been studied at all or
very little. Um so I I want to emphasize
to you though that by positioning
everything in this maxel world, we uh
access a kind of a a connectivity
between these various things which is
not usually found. So usually you know
there's graph theory over here and and
and partially ordered sets over there
and and they're very different uh topics
often right but in this world here
everything is just a maxel and say even
if we're restricting things just to uh
the set 1 2 3 4 we see that there's
potential uh interactions between these
various things right you could take a
4x4 matrix representing a graph and
another one representing an equivalence
or or partially ordered set or whatever
and you could do various things to those
matrices
you could of course multiply them with
the transitive product. Yeah. And you're
going to get another uh such matrix uh
maybe which has some some other
features. So uh of course you could also
take their sum or or or take their union
or such things. And so there's um I
think potential for these various uh
different combinatorial concepts to
interact with each other a lot more than
they they currently do. So this is a
unifying and I think simplifying
approach to a lot of very fundamental
combinatorics all in the context of box
arithmetic over the natural numbers.